I was born deaf,
and I attended a school for the deaf.
Later, I attended college.
While I was there,
I noticed that my vision was deteriorating,
and I couldn’t understand why.
I was informed that I was going blind.
I was stunned.
I was also given an article,
and in the article,
I noticed one sentence that said:
“[Deaf-blind people] are the loneliest people
in the world.”
I was devastated.
Being both deaf and blind is challenging.
I’ve had to learn how to live independently.
But the most important thing
that I’ve learned
is learning about Jehovah—the true God.
Some people might imagine
that a deaf-blind person would be too limited
to serve Jehovah fully.
That’s far from the truth.
Let me give you some examples of my service.
Some of the ways
that I support the congregation
are by attending meetings
and being regular in service.
Sometimes I can be helpful
in training others how
to be more effective teachers.
I often join others on their Bible studies.
I’ve been able to pioneer for many years,
and this is something that I really enjoy.
Over the years,
my husband and I have had the opportunity
to preach in many countries.
In some of the countries,
the deaf ministry was just getting started.
For example,
we went to Honduras in Central America.
They only had two small groups.
We first went for a few months,
then returned and stayed for a year.
What a great experience to participate
and see the growth in the field!
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic,
I was accustomed
to being a self-sufficient person.
For example, I could go out on my own
with my guide dog.
We could go to the Kingdom Hall
to meet the brothers and sisters.
But then COVID-19 hit, and I was
stuck at home—isolated.
While it’s true that we still had meetings
and service arrangements on Zoom,
it wasn’t easy.
The only person who could interpret for me
was my husband, no one else.
It was tough.
He was exhausted.
We both were.
It was something we had to endure.
In time, when it became safe enough,
a few of the brothers and sisters volunteered
to come and help interpret.
That really built me up.
I could finally have direct contact
with my friends.
I was thrilled.
I also receive a lot of support
from the congregation.
There are many willing volunteers
to tactile interpret for me at the meetings.
That gives me joy.
I always know
that if I have a problem, I can share
my thoughts and feelings with others.
They will listen and support me.
No matter what the future brings,
I remember the scripture at Isaiah 41:10.
It says:
“Do not be afraid, for I am with you.”
I know that Jehovah encourages me.
He will help me.
I don’t have to worry.
While it’s true
that I’m deaf and blind, I’m not
one of “the loneliest people in the world.”
I’m a happy person
because I have many friends,
I have the joy of helping others
to learn about God,
and I have the best Friend ever
—Jehovah.